but nevertheless this is introduction to
astronomy and it's the outer solar
system
and so let's begin with that
now much as we had
a roll call
of the inner solar system last week
let's do the same here we have the four
giant planets
sometimes we refer to jupiter and saturn
as giant planets
and sometimes we refer to
the next to uranus and neptune
as giant planets or as ice giants
so we we sometimes call them gas giants
and ice giants to distinguish between
the two pairs
but there's a lot more going on in the
outer solar system there's dwarf planets
such as pluto
and others that have been newly
discovered and
um if anything led to the
reclassification of pluto and an
absolute host of moons um orbiting
around the giants
and various other interesting objects
which we'll have a little look at as
well
so
the
scale of it is truly vast
we looked last time at the inner solar
system and out just to the edge to the
asteroid belt
which is represented in the center here
um occupying a tiny
area by comparison to
uh the orbit of the four giants
um and indeed i've included pluto on
here
you can already see something odd about
pluto its orbit is highly elliptical
and it crosses inner
to
the orbit of neptune and back out again
and that crossing in and out
is really quite uh an interesting aspect
of
the story as to where pluto might have
come from
now last time we covered the asteroid
belt so i won't say too much about these
we we had a look at a couple of uh the
main members but this is really the
dividing line between
the inner solar system and the outer
solar system
and between the orbits of mars and
jupiter
and i talked last time about the titus
bode law
where there was a gap in the numerical
sequence that seemed to indicate
that
uh there was an object missing
and even when
the planet uranus was found that too
fitted into the
scheme
and it's always good when a scientific
idea can
make her a future prediction and then
be
confirmed
right when the facts come in and this
titus bode law
works for both uh the uranus and
for the discovery of
series in the asteroid belt the series
was originally called series fernandiah
because uh the uh fernandez the king of
sicily
uh was the sponsor of
piazzi and he was basically sucking up
to his boss
um
same thing actually happened almost with
uranus when that was discovered which
was uh
that uh william herschel wanted to call
it sidious georgius naming it after uh
the king george that was on the throne
at the time
in the hope perhaps of being awarded
some money or even the role of
royal astronomer
but after a series was discovered in
that gap by piazzi the
floodgates opened
within the next year palace was
discovered and then several more
objects all in that
band that lies between mars and jupiter
you can see series is orbit
neatly fits in
uh right in the middle of the gap there
just where the uh mathematical rule
seemed to suggest it ought to be
that's all good the orbit's a little bit
on the tilted side compared to the
flat plane of the solar system
um and that indicates maybe there's
something a little bit unusual about
series and that was true of most of the
other asteroids as well
the best telescope picture of it taking
from the ground was this one
for many years taken by uh by
hubble so taken from the earth
and the earth's orbits are showing
a mottled surface not really any detail
but our space probes have been
the dawn spacecraft has visited
a couple of the asteroids in the
asteroid belt and it's currently in
orbit around series and uh i think it's
going to remain there it hasn't got the
fuel to do anything else
and it took this photograph as it
approached
of the soft cratered surface
um and then
this main crater in the middle here with
these two white spots in the middle
and the white spots turned out to be
ice volcanoes here's a flyby image
that's been stitched together of an ice
volcano
bursting up through the ground on series
um
showing that there is some sort of
internal heat still
generating geological activity
on this interesting little dwarf planet
as series was reclassified
in fact when it was first discovered it
was deemed to be a planet
and then it got downgraded to be an
asteroid now it's been upgraded to being
a dwarf planet again
if we look at the spots in the middle of
the crater
the detailed flyby shots are just
amazing
they show these ice volcanoes
erupting up from beneath the surface
lots of that fresh white material
has been brought up
and there's a color shot there showing
that some of this contains
uh
mostly white some it's got that sort of
pink tinge to it
and we'll see that pink tinge again
um on
photographs of other objects in a few
minutes
but all of this suggests that ceres is a
small rocky core with a white water ice
layer over the top of it
and then a
dusty ice covered
frozen crow
coating
on the surface
but that
water ice layer
could be
contain enough
pockets of liquid
and and enough of a heat source in the
middle to stop it freezing
and that's really all you need
um plus some organic material and there
seems to be plenty of that on series
to
brew up the conditions for life
so it's a very very interesting
development that this could be somewhere
to go and look for primitive life
underneath the ice
the dawn spacecraft also visited vesta
and showed it to be almost
a sphere
um it's a little bit off round and it
has a huge crater
in the
the southern region here covering almost
a quarter of the surface this lump is
the central mound and the crater goes
right around here
and that crater the rio silva crater
was formed and bl
by an impact and the fragments
from it were blasted off all around the
inner solar system and many many of them
have landed back here on earth and
there's a special class of meteorites
that we pick up on the earth's surface
that are known to come from this uh
little world of vesta
that's about 40 percent in total of all
the um
meteorites that you find on earth come
from this one event
in comparison size wise
the four largest or three
uh well here
i say it again here are four of the
largest uh asteroids in comparison
though to our moon which shows really
they are quite small because the moon is
uh quite small compared to
the uh planet earth
you've soon discovered though that there
are hundreds of thousands of other
objects
orbiting around in this region
all much smaller
and many of them with very irregular
shapes
there's a collection of them here
such as this sort of potato shaped ida
with its little moon deck tile that
orbits around it
gaspara eros here
named of anne frank
it's okawa that one's been visited by a
spacecraft as well
um and then these guys down here
that have this other type of designation
with
a number p and then the name on the
front these are not asteroids but the
nuclei
of comets that frozen snowball is the
core of a comet
um and
they look very similar to asteroids
in fact
it may just be that the cometary
versions are in much longer elliptical
orbits
and have a lot more water and volatile
materials left in them because they
haven't spent as much of their time near
the sun
but when they do
that material gets boiled away to form
the tails that we see in the sky
anyway let's uh have a look at the giant
planets so here's a picture of jupiter
it's 10 times the diameter of the earth
and being 10 times in each of the three
axes
that
means that you could drop a thousand
earths inside it
but it's only 300 times the mass
so relatively less dense
um only just slightly more dense than
water in fact
it's it's mass
adds up to
the vast majority of the material that
is not part of the sun though it's two
and a half times the mass of all the
other planets and moons all added
together so very much the dominant
object in the solar system apart from
the sun
and it orbits around
the sun at five times the earth sun
distance the
astronomical unit or au
and it does that every 12 years as you
can see
there's a fantastic picture of the cloud
tops we really can't see deep inside the
planet to find out what's going on
although we did drop the galileo space
probe in there and learned a certain
amount about what happens
in the upper layers of these clouds at
least
so we know the composition mostly
hydrogen some helium
much as
most of the stars are made of the same
material
with traces
of uh other elements are the molecules
there so we've got the
ukraine and ethane quite a lot of water
ammonia
um hydrogen sulfide phosphine benzene
all sorts of things
um they think the red spot here giant
red spot
is a hurricane it's been raging since
galileo first looked at jupiter i've got
a little animation of that
you can see we've uh held the great red
spot
almost stationary and you can see how
the rest of the atmosphere
moves
in quite amazing turbulent ways
see lots of little hurricanes coming
along um and encountering the great red
spot most of them just get swallowed up
into it um
it's quite impressive
but it it's
about three times the size of the earth
um and what's happening is we're
being able to see down
into other layers of material and other
altitudes in the eye of the storm
and the red material is mostly
formed by the atmosphere getting
sunburned it's the action of ultraviolet
light
on the
molecules
and chemicals in the atmosphere that
makes them react with each other and
form
some of these brown and red materials
these so-called phtholons
the same
sorts of chemicals that we saw in that
um
ice volcano at series and we'll see them
again
the animation at the bottom there again
just shows how the um
if you keep the
red spot centered then the rest of the
atmosphere just seems to move around it
and this was taken by one of the
spacecraft as it approached jupiter
we can guess and estimate about what's
going on in the center based on the
density and our knowledge of science
and so the other
measurements to do with magnetic fields
and
so forth and what we find is that
there's probably a small rocky core
right in the center
a bit like a sort of giant version of
the earth
and then overlaying that there's a very
large and uh deep
and pressurized layer of metallic
hydrogen this would be a liquid metal
composed of the
atomic form of hydrogen where it's been
squeezed together so much that all of
the electrons become
shared between all the atoms much as
this is the uh behavior of
metals that we know around us so a very
highly
um
electrically conducting layer and that
gives jupiter an absolutely enormous
magnetic field due to the fact it's
spinning around on its axis once every
10 and a half hours even though it's 10
times the size of our planet
it whips around in half the time
and that stirs up a huge
amount of electrical activity in the
metallic hydrogen layer
very strong magnetic field
and interactions with the solar wind
create the aurora the
northern lights and the southern lights
around the poles of jupiter only on
jupiter they are blue rather than the
green color
as the
ionized radiation hits the atmosphere it
makes the methane in the atmosphere glow
with this blue color
whereas on earth it's the oxygen in our
atmosphere that
tends to react and gives us the green of
the aurora
now of course jupiter is accompanied by
a family of moons
i can't remember the latest number i
think they got up to 83
in total
but they keep finding new ones so that
number changes each time i give the
course um
it has however got four
very spectacular large planet-sized
moons
that were seen by galileo you can see a
page from galileo's notebook here where
he shows the disc of jupiter and the
little tiny
specks around it that are the four
large moons
io europa ganymede and callisto the
orbit around jupiter
that's what they look like with a small
telescope you can usually see the bands
or across the equator of jupiter and the
moons orbit around in that equatorial
plane
close up though from space probes we get
some magnificent views
of the four galilean moons
um io europa ganymede callisto across
the top there with zoomed in fragments
of each of them underneath
so these are the grooves in the ice
crust of europa and so forth
individually this is io
looks like a pizza but it's covered in
sulfur not cheese
and
the different colors that you see on the
surface there
are the different colors that you get
when you heat sulfur and cool it down at
different rates you get if you cool it
down very quickly you get black
uh less quickly orange
usually if you cool fairly slowly you
get the yellow color that we're more
familiar with and if you cool it down
really slowly indeed then you get the
white material
and so once you've excluded the colors
of sulfur there's not really very much
left on
io there in that image
the
reason for all this activity is it's the
most volcanic place in the solar system
the core is boiling away
all the sulfur and other materials are
coming up to the surface
and bursting out
we can see um a huge plume from an
active volcano on the surface of io here
there's another one there another one
there going off another one here and
here's an another eruption just caught
in into the uh the backlit
um
backscatter of the light from the sun
there so you can see it
churning away and producing these
volcanic eruptions
all the time
europa
somewhat calmer environment
an ice covering with
huge long grooves and cracks in it not
very many impact craters there's one
there that tells us that this is a
surface that is constantly undergoing
change and being
covered over and resurfaced otherwise
the number of craters gradually
accumulates
but
all of this
material here the brown material again
this is those organic molecules called
phtholons
that have been formed
photochemically
probably so they may well have been
organic material come up from underneath
through the cracks in the in the ice
from a liquid ocean
beneath
and then
photochemically changed into these uh
orangey brown coloured materials or they
were formed like that underneath and
they've been brought to the surface but
either way this again is a pointer to
the fact there's a lot of organic
material
in that
ocean underneath the ice
um and europa is probably the number one
candidate for
uh
discovering
independently uh formed biosphere of
life in the ocean
in that protected zone
um protected from the ravages of
the radiation from the sun by a very
thick layer of ice over it
ganymede
next one out is the largest moon in the
solar system
it's actually a whopper it's bigger than
mercury so if it orbited the sun we'd
have no trouble really calling this a
planet i think
um
and it too has ice and water layers
within it
uh we're less sure whether they're
fully melted or
um liquid uh layers or frozen up
uh or some sort of slushy combination
now the
reason that these moons are not dead
frozen objects
um is all
contained in this little diagram at the
bottom here which shows how the
orbits are linked together
if you watch uh the innermost moon there
io zipping around
trying to get my timing right it's going
to catch europa at the top there
and again there
and again
there and so it's catching europa and
you see it's every other time
on that occasion it caught it next time
there's nobody home
so
it's a two-to-one relationship
and the same thing happens if you watch
the second moon out europa it meets
ganymede at the bottom there
goes round
nobody home second time around it means
ganymede again and so they're in a one
to two to four
relationship
this pumps their orbits into being uh
elliptical
which means they
change their distance regularly between
themselves and jupiter
and that creates a tidal gravitational
effect that stretches them into more
rugby ball shapes
and then as they move further away from
jupiter it releases
its grip and they return to their
natural spherical shape
and that
squishing and stretching that they
undergo
is what provides the internal heat
source that keeps them from being
completely dead and frozen up
geologically
the fourth of the galilean moons
callisto
is not playing this game it's orbiting
further out but it's not
in the same sort of integer relationship
and so it's all but it's very circular
it's not getting very much uh
internal heat generated by this tidal
stretching
um so it's solidified and
all cooled down now
and accumulating more and more craters
on the surface so we see an old crater
covered surface on callisto much as we
do on our moon
now jupiter also has a system of rings
in fact the voyager probe revealed that
all of the outer planets have a system
of rings not just saturn um only
saturn's are by far the most um
comprehensive so jupiter's got its own
rings around it
and of course it has
lots of other
lesser moons moonlets
uh including things like
althea here is the next largest that
orbit around in the ring zone and
control
the
position at which the rings form
there's a picture of uh
althea here
we've not actually been close enough to
it other than to be able to see this
and see that it's clearly far from round
that's because it's too small
um anything over a few hundred
kilometers
and gravity starts to be able to
force the rock into the the spherical
shape
so that it's uh has uh the minimum
energy configuration something that
isaac newton proved
and around jupiter there are all the
rest of the irregular moons all orbiting
in a complete bird's nest uh around it
as you can see here some of them go the
right way round um as in the same
direction that all the planets orbit the
sun
others go backwards
that's chaos
um as you can see from that diagram
but jupiter also controls the asteroid
belt not only does its gravity corral
the
limits of the main belt
but there are some asteroids that are
trapped
in jupiter's orbit
positions called the lagrange points
they're
60 degrees ahead of jupiter
and 60 degrees behind jupiter in its
orbit
and these are
relatively stable um sorry i've got
another
animation that shows actually
the main belt asteroids that we think of
as in that
circular belt around uh the sun between
mars and jupiter
but jupiter's gravity interacting with
that of the sun
puts each individual
asteroid into an elliptical orbit
but collectively they form this weird
slightly curved
triangular
geometry
um
where the
uh
points of the orbits that
are furthest away from the sun
come out and meet jupiter's orbit
at one of three places
and if they meet at the lagrange points
there's a chance the asteroids get
trapped there for a while and become
part of
the uh
group that just stay
out in jupiter's orbit there the ones
that are marked in green these are all
real orbits of the real asteroids the
largest ones quite amazing to see how uh
it's really not quite the uh structure
you
naturally would expect
um and the other effect that jupiter has
is to force the asteroids into this
uh geometry where
some
ratios of the orbital
period
the time taken to do an orbit
are
highly unfavorable so for example
we have anywhere from
2.1 astronomical units just beyond mars
out to three and a half here on this
graph and we've plotted the number of
asteroids at each position and you can
see that here 2.5
that's
a three to one ratio
with
jupiter's orbit
in terms of the year length uh and
that's not stable and any asteroid that
tries to get into this orbit soon gets
kicked out of it
and there are others at five to two and
seven to three and two to one
particularly that are bad orbits to try
and adopt and the others are much more
popular um and that's because these can
be stable whereas these you persistently
get a kick in one direction from jupiter
and it knocks you out of that orbit
quite quickly
moving on out to saturn we find a
slightly smaller planet than jupiter
it's still
actually without its rings it's eight
and a half times the size of earth so
it's not far behind jupiter
but with the rings it's actually uh
covers a greater
radius
anyway
you can see the basic numbers there i
won't read them all out this uh 29 and a
half years
for the period that it takes to orbit
the sun is in a five to two integer
relationship with jupiter
and the two control each other to a
certain extent
uh
over a period of a thousand years they
gradually uh nudge each other into
longer and shorter orbits and oscillate
magnificent shot there taken
by the cassini space probe of the planet
with the rings and showing the gaps in
the rings
those gaps in the rings are just like
the gaps in the asteroid belt
and they occur because the large moons
of
saturn
are interacting gravitationally with the
ring particles to kick them out of the
orbits that lie within this gap the
cassini division and again this narrower
gap here called the nk division
if we look at uh saturn
courtesy of some of the images from the
cassini mission uh it discovered again a
blue aurora
telling us that statin has uh methane in
its atmosphere and a very strong
magnetic field to whip the solar uh wind
up and focus it down on the poles and
create those northern and southern
lights
and brothers surprisingly the wind
patterns
have managed to form a
quasi-stable
hexagon
arrangement so the polar hexagon
sis
sits on the pole of saturn and really
it's a number of hurricanes
that are uh orbiting around six of them
round one central one
and it turns out you can pack six
rotating hurricanes around a
central one in a in a nice stable and
efficient way
um
not so easy to do it with either five or
seven
and they end up interfering and
destroying each other that's six you can
get a very stick
stay
stable uh wind pattern
here's a backlit picture of saturn with
its rings that was taken
with with the sun in uh hiding behind
um
so the cassini probe went into the
shadow of saturn to
take this picture and you can see the
complex structure within the rings is
not just the two gaps
but there are many uh
ring thicker and thinner
patches to the rings
and even some outer rings out here
containing much more sort of dusty
material that you wouldn't normally see
but i'll draw your attention to this
little dot here
that's you
that's the little blue dot that's the
earth
being seen through the rings of saturn
by the cassini space probe so everyone
who's alive or has ever lived
is on that little blue dot there i think
that's quite a sobering thought
now the
greater and lesser moons of saturn are
all as i said responsible for organizing
the patterns within the rings now here's
a good example there are two little
moonlets
called pandora and prometheus that
actually to
shepherd all the particles in the
f ring
here
and keep it
in its nice tidy or orientation they
also create these
weird
striations and spokes
as they go round and approach the rings
so the gravity
creates
quite a lot of interesting substructures
in the rings
and here on the outer edge of
this ring we think there's a new
moonlet being formed out of the dusty
material you can see the little blob
on the end of a sort of dead end bit of
ring
and we think that's a moon gradually
being created
the largest wing of saturn is titan
um it's
nearly the same size as the planet
mercury and a fascinating world in its
own right
um
it has an atmosphere that's uh 50
more dense than that of the earth
and
full of
dirty dusty smog
so that we can't see down through it
with ordinary telescopes
so
when nasa sent the cassini probe
to saturn
the european space agency hitched a ride
with on it with their huygens lander
which parachuted down through the
atmosphere of titan
and discovered scenes like this big
picture at the bottom here with mountain
ranges
rising up from the floor it's a little
bit fisheye distorted because of the the
way the camera worked but with these
long valleys in between and on the
valley floors there are what look like
rivers
um
braided river channels running across
the surface
um
it landed
and sent this picture back of this
orange
landscape with
lots of round rocks round pebbles
that look like they're on a beach um and
it probably was either a dried-up
riverbed or a beach that it landed on
we're not quite sure uh next time
they're gonna send a rover of some sort
but they also use the radar on the
lander to
image down through the clouds and
discover lakes such as this one the
kraken mari and you can see how the
river channels are
meandering and
braiding and getting together
merging and then outflowing into the
lake
um and so this
lake is part of the
liquid cycle
but it's liquid methane
and the temperature on titan minus 160
degrees c it's too cold for liquid water
to exist
so this sort of
all of the river contents and lake
contents and the clouds are all
substituted with methane natural gas as
we would call it on earth
here's an example
we've got clouds of methane
forming and moving across the surface
and then presumably raining out
because this little lake has gone from
near dried up to refilled
and we see that with the giant lake
crack and marie as well if we look at
the
this
area
of this little peninsula
over different
flybys
you can see the shape of the land has
changed and in fact it's changed in a
way that's consistent with the level of
the lake
overall having gone up and down
more cloud features again released just
the other day by nasa
so
still getting some pictures through
and
the real star of the show at saturn was
the little moon enceladus only 500
kilometers across
but nevertheless
another of these snowball worlds these
ice worlds where there's an ice covering
um that's refreshing itself so it's not
picking up too many new craters
um
what craters it does pick up are getting
destroyed by geological processes
but
huge cracks in the ice called the tiger
stripes these blue cracks here
and they're venting material out into
space this is a backlit shot over one of
the tiger stripes showing a plume of
material
leaking out into space and a false color
picture of the same thing and they flew
the space probe through
the
plume and discovered that it was
water and it contained a mixture of
organic chemicals and some molecular
hydrogen just h2
and that's quite unusual
uh
to find
organic chemicals and hydrogen present
like that
in a mixture and is suggestive of some
sort of biological activity again
in this liquid ocean
over the rocky core of enceladus
other
moons of saturn have all sorts of
interesting properties i can't don't
have time to go through all of them but
this is iapetus that has this equatorial
ridge along its uh
middle here you can see it going right
around the moon here
um
nobody knows how that's formed some
people say it might be
um a captured asteroid that was shredded
and deposited all its material or maybe
it was a ring around uranus uh not
uranus the appetizers that uh condensed
onto the surface
uh
some people have said it's where they've
glued the two halves together but uh i
think that's perhaps more fanciful
lots to say about the rest of the moons
of saturn uh there are other ice worlds
there there are all sorts of amazing
things to look at but we have to move on
and this is a picture of uranus
showing that
that size it's four times the diameter
of the earth
um and therefore contains four times
four times four
which is 64 times the volume
but only 14 times the mass so again
relatively less dense
than a typical rocky planet
that's because it has this huge
envelope of gas
and volatile materials
sitting on top of it uh one or two
little features in the cloud belts here
but otherwise a rather boring uh picture
um was a
with an anti-climax when that came
through from voyager 2 which is the only
spacecraft to go out here
this far from the sun
the planet was discovered by william
herschel he was
in the middle of studying double stars
with his telescope from um
his back garden in bath thought he'd
found a comet reported it to the royal
astronomical society
uh but its orbit soon revealed that it
was
way beyond saturn and orbiting in a near
circular orbit so the first person in
modern times to discover a planet
but it's a bit of an oddball in some
ways because it's tipped right over on
its side
and so the rotation
can be such that the poles are pointing
towards the sun and away from the sun
um and that the planet is rolling along
its orbit on its side
uh at times and at other times it can be
rotating
in into and out of daylight
with the poles pointing
along a tangent to its orbit
it has rings and it also has a family of
moons that are quite fascinating again
we don't have time to go to too much of
that
um
its discovery soon led to the prediction
and discovery of the next planet in the
sequence
as i said
earlier
william herschel discovered uranus
optically with a telescope
wanted to call it
um
sidious georgius after the king of
england
but nobody would uh put up with that so
eventually sanity prevailed and uranus
the father of saturn
in mythology seemed appropriate given
its location
well
its orbit didn't seem to quite add up
and john q adams in cambridge and urbain
la verrier in paris independently went
about
solving the problem and predicted that
there was another planet
out beyond
um and of course eventually it was found
and
leverier's predictions were used
to make the discovery so he gets the
lion's share of the credit on this one
and we call that planet neptune after
the god of the sea
very sensible
in this case
um
le verrier wanted to call it le
verrier's planet but nobody else was uh
interested in in that and neptune had
been a suggestion
for the name for the planet uranus at
one stage
until uranus was widely adopted
so neptune
slightly smaller in
radius than
uranus but slightly more massive
and it's uh takes 165 years the
time taken to go round the sun
increases quite dramatically as you move
further away the amazing voyager 2 shot
here with the great dark spot
um a little bit similar to the um
great red spot on jupiter but the
chemistry in the atmosphere is different
there's a lot more methane and a lot
less hydrogen
and so the
coloration is very blue
a real surprise was the large moon
triton that orbits neptune again it's a
planet-sized moon
and we got this one composite photograph
from voyager 2
of
a flyby of triton
where
we were expecting of course a crater
covered surface
but not so
and the
surface is amazingly
young looking and dynamic looking with
geological activity hardly any impact
craters at all
up in the top here it's called the
cantaloupe terrain named after the skin
of a type of melon
and has these amazing grooves
reminiscent of the grooves that run on
the surface of europa suggesting perhaps
an ice
covered uh ocean
of some form maybe not of liquid water
at this case though because the
temperature
out this far from the sun is now down to
a chilly minus 230 degrees centigrade
and then this hemisphere is all covered
in this pink snow
which is
frozen nitrogen it's nitrogen snow
nitrogen is the gas that is the
lion's share of the
air you're breathing right now
that's um
can be liquefied
and if you cool it enough down to these
sorts of temperatures it can be turned
into a solid and so it has snowed
nitrogen onto the ground here
but the real feature is these black bits
these streaks these
that line up they're all pointing the
same way
and they're all pointing in the
prevailing wind direction
on titan
downwind and what we think they are are
these uh
amazing geezers that are erupting from
the subsurface and they're probably
liquid nitrogen that has uh
melted and then
tried to boil um
and burst through which is
uh geezers on the earth
made of superheated steam do the same
thing
and they bringing with them a lot of
very dark material which they deposit
downwind um and we're not sure what that
dark material is
uh why it would be
happening quite that way
but it's very interesting again
from the
chemistry and the chemistry of life
point of view to understand that
wherever you have
thermal processes
generating activity and movement of a
liquid
um and
you have a temperature gradient
that's enough usually for life to find
it to be
habitable
to give it all the
things it needs to live on
so we need to study triton some more
now interestingly if we go back to that
titus bowed law and fill in the rest of
the planets that we now know about
and we use series in this gap here it
fits very nicely
um we've calculated the titus bow
distance 2.8 for series
and the real distance 2.77
so it's only an eight percent error
that's pretty good in fact it's better
than uh the five percent error for mars
um
as we go out
saturn also 4.8
uranus even better 2.8 error
neptune however just does not fit
there's a 30
error and you can see
the titus bowed law
fits nicely all the way out here but for
neptune its prediction
and uh the actuality just deviate
horribly
and if you try and plug pluto in as the
next planet in the sequence well you're
nearly a hundred percent wrong so
it's uh just a terrible fit
so it could well be that the titus bode
law is really just
a numerical accident
in fact
and there's no more science to it than
that
but
having discovered uranus and then
predicted and discovered
neptune
further perturbations in the orbits of
the planets led to the
suspicion that we hadn't found them all
yet and the
there was a planet x out there
that led to personal lowell here
building his
flagstaff observatory and charging glide
combo
with
um
doing a search
for pluto
it's
the discovery image pair are here even
with the helpful arrow it's still quite
difficult to spot pluto
but a client did spot it in 1930 and
it was immediately thought to be a
planet people were expecting a
substantial chunk
um
maybe as big as the earth or even larger
some people published articles
suggesting it was
larger even than jupiter
but
in 1978 we began to get some real
hard science
as to the size of pluto
because its little moon sharon was
discovered
and
the photograph is here
in black on white
black is pluto and then here sharon is
just popping out
on the top here
and with the two orbiting each other
suddenly you can start to get
a handle on things with mathematics
and work out their masses and their size
and so forth very much the case that uh
pluto is smaller than our moon
and sharon is quite a big
moon in comparison to pluto
um
as a result of the
fact that one was passing in front of
the other they were able to use
computers to synthesize
a picture of what the surface of pluto
might look like
and you can see it's got this heart
shaped bright region
somewhat similar to the shape of africa
that they thought ought to be there in
the data as a result of the overall
brightness changes
when sharon was orbiting in front of and
blocking the view to the surface of
pluto managed to unstitch all of the
sort of overlaid light
and come up with
a model for what was causing it
um
now
in fact the uh estimates of the size of
pluto here we have a little uh humorous
graph actually which showed that they
were expecting a very large object
but as estimates kept on coming in
by the time they'd um
got to 1978
and the discovery of sharon the estimate
came down to 1 500th of the earth's mast
and they even predicted that if this
process carried on
it was going to disappear completely but
that was very much a tongue-in-cheek
prediction
so because of its small size and because
of its strange orbit
and
because other objects were being
discovered
out beyond
neptune
it was decided that pluto would be
demoted to dwarf planets
and in fact
its small size meant it could never have
been responsible for the
believed errors in the orbits of the
giant planets
and in 1992
some analysis of their voyager
spacecraft trajectory
showed that we'd got the mass of saturn
wrong in our estimates by half a percent
and if we
plug that number back into all our
calculations
then
everything
comes out right
and there's no need for a large missing
planet x to be believed to be out there
and so pluto was very much discovered
uh on the basis of a bogus prediction
due to a mis-estimated mass for saturn
but
nasa sent the flyby mission
the new horizons spacecraft
was already on its way when pluto was
devoted
and
it did a flyby and approached pluto and
immediately began to discover more moons
in the system
so here is pluto and sharon taken by the
approaching spacecraft
it found a couple of small moons here
um as it approached
and they were called they've been named
nix and hydra
and then it's found two more which have
been called sticks and kerberos
so
uh quite a complicated little system in
its own right pluto
but then the probe did a close flyby it
didn't have the fuel to slow down and
stop and it took this photograph of the
surface
which shocked everybody because there is
an almost an absence
of craters and we really can't quite
explain
why pluto
does not have
a an ancient old surface
covered in craters
because with its small size it shouldn't
have been able to trap enough internal
heat to
then continue its geological activity
all the way to the present day but it
clearly is this is a huge glacier that's
moving across the surface of pluto
rubbing out the impact craters
this one here is for the chop
the glacier is going to rub that out and
fill it in
um and destroy the record of the impact
ever having occurred
we've got a false color image of pluto
here where the color of the surface has
been enhanced
based
on
the real color and
the chemistry of the region so we can
label that up
the blue up here that's frozen methane
this is red down here that's ordinary
water ice with a lot of these stolens in
it again
um
we have
frozen out nitrogen snow up the top
there and then the glacier which is
not made of water ice but made of frozen
up carbon monoxide methane and nitrogen
mixed together and it's marching its way
across the surface here's another couple
of shots of that glass here
um a close-up shot here shows the
structure it looks very much like the
sea ice
on the
arctic regions
the uh
i've also discovered
more of these uh ice volcanoes on pluto
where these mountains have been
identified as
eruptions of ice from beneath
so a cryo volcano low temperature
volcano and all of this activity just is
still unexplained we don't know why
pluto hasn't
lost all of its internal heat it
certainly uh seems to have had time
more fascinating shots a few impact
craters on this region but up here the
glacier has been and swept over it and
erased the
record
raw shots of pluto looking back
catching the uh thin atmosphere
by backscattering the light from the sun
so we can see that um these amazing
terrains with sort of dunes covering uh
higher areas here
and one thing that they found was
grooves in the ice
with these
dark features which
seemed to disappear down inside them
there's deep pits
um and nobody really quite knows what uh
is going on there
even sharon the moon of pluto is very
interesting it's got a few more craters
on it than pluto but not very many
um and very much a sort of moon of two
halves
where there's a
join or a raised
platform
um
around the middle here and the
this hemisphere the top hemisphere on
the picture
is higher than the ground around the
lower half
for some reason
but we got absolutely fantastic images
of it so scientists can spend
a lot of time going over this and uh
trying to understand better what's going
on here on this moon and the outer parts
of the solar system
now i said that there were other objects
that had been discovered
uh out beyond neptune other than pluto
and
they form a second asteroid belt called
the kuiper belt we found hundreds of
thousands of these
some plotted in green here on this
diagram there's neptune for example
um so further out and pluto is just one
of this population
reason there's a gap there is not
because there aren't any objects but
because
we haven't looked
there
um here's some
artist impression of a few of them
actually we've got a real photograph of
pluto
and
it's it's family of moonlets that it's
acquired
but similar in size
to pluto is eris and it's who has a moon
of dyspnomia
um and it was really the discovery by
mike brown in california of
eris that
put the cat among the pigeons for pluto
because we were if pluto was a planet
then surely eris needed to be
in which case
what of makimaki and kwame and some of
these other guys that were being
discovered out beyond neptune and we
were going to end up with dozens of
planets very so shortly so made
astronomical union decided something had
to be done
the organization of this second asteroid
belt gets dictated by the gravity of
neptune
and so we have
objects like pluto that are in a a two
to three orbits
around the sun compared to that of
neptune so they do two laps for every
three that neptune does pluto is one of
those and the others are called plutinos
now
and then we have two tinos which are in
a one to two relationship with neptune
and
uh other funny names the kubiwanos here
are named after um
the first of the objects to be found
which had the designation qbe one hence
qbino uh for those that were in the
intervening range now i've used up all
my time for tonight so i'm going to have
to bring the story of the outer solar
system to a close but just to say this
is not the end of the solar system
there are more objects
way out beyond the edge of the kuiper
belt in what's called the scattered disk
and we we're finding more and more of
those all the time
there's even a hint that there might be
a decent sized planet waiting out in the
scattered disc
to be discovered but a search has been
organized and found nothing so
that's another story to be
finalized at some stage
and then beyond the scattered disc is
a huge sphere of
leftover material little dirty snowballs
called the oort cloud which um
really is the limit of the sun's reach
um and these
are the home and the source of many of
the long period comets that fall into
the
solar system so with that i'll bring the
talk to a close and i hope you've
enjoyed this the fourth part of our very
good